Add more verbose docs and clean up examples (#344)
zenml-io/zenml: docs/book/guides/common-usecases/custom-materializer.md

at the right time. E.g. If a ZenML step returns a `pd.DataFrame`, ZenML will try to find any materializer that has 
`pd.DataFrame` (or its subclasses) in its ` ASSOCIATED_TYPES`.
- `ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES` simply define what `type` of artifacts are being stored. This can be `DataArtifact`, 
`StatisticsArtifact`, `DriftArtifact`, etc. This is simply a tag to query certain artifact types in the post-execution 
workflow.

## Extending the `BaseMaterializer`

In order to control more precisely how data flowing between steps is treated, one can simply extend the 
`BaseMaterializer` by sub-classing it.

```python
class MyCustomMaterializer(BaseMaterializer):
    """Define my own materialization logic"""
    ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES = [...]
    ASSOCIATED_TYPES = [...]

    def handle_input(self, data_type: Type[Any]) -> Any:
        # read from self.artifact.uri
        ...

    def handle_return(self, data: Any) -> None:
        # write `data` to self.artifact.uri
        ...
```

For example, let's say you a custom object called MyObject that flows between two steps in a pipeline:

```python
from zenml.steps import step

> from zenml.pipelines import pipeline
> class MyObj:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from zenml.pipelines import pipeline

class MyObj:
```

Author: Done!

    def __init__(self, name: str):
        self.name = name

@step
def step1() -> MyObj:
    return MyObj("jk")

@step
def step1(my_obj: MyObj):
    print(my_obj)

@pipeline
def pipe(step1, step2):
    step2(step1())

pipe(
    step1=step1(), 
    step2=step2()
).run()
```

Running the above without a custom materializer will result in the following error:

```shell
zenml.exceptions.StepInterfaceError: Unable to find materializer for output 'output' of 
type `<class '__main__.MyObj'>` in step 'step1'. Please make sure to either explicitly set a materializer for step 
outputs using `step.with_return_materializers(...)` or registering a default materializer for specific types by 
subclassing `BaseMaterializer` and setting its `ASSOCIATED_TYPES` class variable. 
For more information, visit https://docs.zenml.io/guides/common-usecases/custom-materializer.
```

The above basically means that ZenML does not know how to persist the object of type `MyObj` between steps (how could 
it, we just created this!). Therefore, one can create our own materializer:

```python

> from zenml.materializers.base_materializer import BaseMaterializer
> from zenml.artifacts import DataArtifact
> from zenml.io import fileio
> import os
> from typing import Type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import os
from typing import Type

from zenml.artifacts import DataArtifact
from zenml.io import fileio
from zenml.materializers.base_materializer import BaseMaterializer
```

class MyMaterializer(BaseMaterializer):
    ASSOCIATED_TYPES = [MyObj]
    ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES = [DataArtifact]

    def handle_input(self, data_type: Type[MyObj]) -> MyObj:
        """Read from artifact store"""
        super().handle_input(data_type)
        with fileio.open(os.path.join(self.artifact.uri, 'data.txt'), 'r') as f:
            name = f.read()
        return MyObj(name=name)

    def handle_return(self, my_obj: MyObj) -> None:
        """Write to artifact store"""
        super().handle_return(my_obj)
        with fileio.open(os.path.join(self.artifact.uri, 'data.txt'), 'w') as f:
            f.write(my_obj.name)
```

Pro-tip: Use the ZenML `fileio` handle to ensure your materialization logic works across artifact stores (local and 
remote like S3 buckets).

Then edit the pipeline as follows:

```python
pipe(
    step1=step1().with_return_materializers(MyMaterializer),
    step2=step2()
).run()
```

Please note that for multiple outputs a dictionary can be supplied of type {OUTPUT_NAME: MATERIALIZER_CLASS} to the 
`with_return_materializers` function.

> Also notice that `with_return_materializers` need only be called on step1, all downstream steps will use the same 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, notice that `with_return_materializers` need only be called on step1, all downstream steps will use the same 
```

---
description: All code in this guide can be found [here](https://github.com/zenml-io/zenml/tree/main/examples/custom_materializer).
---

# Creating a custom materializer

> ## What is a materializer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What is a materializer?
```

> The precise way that data passes between the steps is dictated by `materializers`. The data that flows through steps 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The precise way that data passes between the steps is dictated by materializers. The data that flows through steps 
```

> is called `artifacts` and artifacts are stored in `artifact stores`. The logic that governs the reading and writing of 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are stored as artifacts and artifacts are stored in artifact stores. The logic that governs the reading and writing of 
```

> data to and from the `artifact stores` lives in the `materializers`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
data to and from the artifact stores lives in the materializers.
```

```python
class BaseMaterializer(metaclass=BaseMaterializerMeta):
    """Base Materializer to realize artifact data."""

    ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES = []
    ASSOCIATED_TYPES = []

    def __init__(self, artifact: "BaseArtifact"):
        """Initializes a materializer with the given artifact."""
        self.artifact = artifact

    def handle_input(self, data_type: Type[Any]) -> Any:
        """Write logic here to handle input of the step function.

        Args:
            data_type: What type the input should be materialized as.
        Returns:
            Any object that is to be passed into the relevant artifact in the
            step.
        """
        # read from self.artifact.uri
        ...

    def handle_return(self, data: Any) -> None:
        """Write logic here to handle return of the step function.

        Args:
            data: Any object that is specified as an input artifact of the step.
        """
        # write `data` to self.artifact.uri
        ...
```

Above you can see the basic definition of the `BaseMaterializer`. All other materializers inherit from this class, and 

> this class defines the interface of all `materializers`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this class defines the interface of all materializers. 
```

> Each `materializer` has an `artifact` object. The most important property of an `artifact` object is the `uri`. The 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each materializer has an `artifact` object. The most important property of an `artifact` object is the `uri`. The 
```

> `uri` is created by ZenML on pipeline run time and points to the directory of a file system (the artifact store).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`uri` is created by ZenML at pipeline run time and points to the directory of a file system (the artifact store).
```

The `handle_input` and `handle_return` functions are important. 

- `handle_input` is responsible for **reading** the artifact from the artifact store.
- `handle_return` is responsible for **writing** the artifact to the artifact store.

> Each `materializer` has `ASSOCIATED_TYPES` and `ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each materializer has `ASSOCIATED_TYPES` and `ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES`.
```

- `ASSOCIATED_TYPES` is the data type that is being stored. ZenML uses this information to call the right materializer 

> at the right time. E.g. If a ZenML step returns a `pd.DataFrame`, ZenML will try to find any materializer that has 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
at the right time. i.e. If a ZenML step returns a `pd.DataFrame`, ZenML will try to find any materializer that has 
```

> `pd.DataFrame` (or its subclasses) in its ` ASSOCIATED_TYPES`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`pd.DataFrame` (or its subclasses) in its `ASSOCIATED_TYPES`.
```

- `ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES` simply define what `type` of artifacts are being stored. This can be `DataArtifact`, 
`StatisticsArtifact`, `DriftArtifact`, etc. This is simply a tag to query certain artifact types in the post-execution 
workflow.

## Extending the `BaseMaterializer`

In order to control more precisely how data flowing between steps is treated, one can simply extend the 
`BaseMaterializer` by sub-classing it.

```python
class MyCustomMaterializer(BaseMaterializer):
    """Define my own materialization logic"""
    ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES = [...]
    ASSOCIATED_TYPES = [...]

    def handle_input(self, data_type: Type[Any]) -> Any:
        # read from self.artifact.uri
        ...

    def handle_return(self, data: Any) -> None:
        # write `data` to self.artifact.uri
        ...
```

> For example, let's say you a custom object called MyObject that flows between two steps in a pipeline:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, let's say you a custom object called `MyObject` that flows between two steps in a pipeline:
```

```python
from zenml.steps import step
from zenml.pipelines import pipeline

class MyObj:
    def __init__(self, name: str):
        self.name = name

@step
def step1() -> MyObj:
    return MyObj("jk")

@step
def step1(my_obj: MyObj):
    print(my_obj)

@pipeline
def pipe(step1, step2):
    step2(step1())

pipe(
    step1=step1(), 
    step2=step2()
).run()
```

Running the above without a custom materializer will result in the following error:

```shell
zenml.exceptions.StepInterfaceError: Unable to find materializer for output 'output' of 
type `<class '__main__.MyObj'>` in step 'step1'. Please make sure to either explicitly set a materializer for step 
outputs using `step.with_return_materializers(...)` or registering a default materializer for specific types by 
subclassing `BaseMaterializer` and setting its `ASSOCIATED_TYPES` class variable. 
For more information, visit https://docs.zenml.io/guides/common-usecases/custom-materializer.
```

The above basically means that ZenML does not know how to persist the object of type `MyObj` between steps (how could 

> it, we just created this!). Therefore, one can create our own materializer:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it? We just created this!). Therefore, we can create our own materializer:
```

```python
from zenml.materializers.base_materializer import BaseMaterializer
from zenml.artifacts import DataArtifact
from zenml.io import fileio
import os
from typing import Type

class MyMaterializer(BaseMaterializer):
    ASSOCIATED_TYPES = [MyObj]
    ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES = [DataArtifact]

    def handle_input(self, data_type: Type[MyObj]) -> MyObj:
        """Read from artifact store"""
        super().handle_input(data_type)
        with fileio.open(os.path.join(self.artifact.uri, 'data.txt'), 'r') as f:
            name = f.read()
        return MyObj(name=name)

    def handle_return(self, my_obj: MyObj) -> None:
        """Write to artifact store"""
        super().handle_return(my_obj)
        with fileio.open(os.path.join(self.artifact.uri, 'data.txt'), 'w') as f:
            f.write(my_obj.name)
```

> Pro-tip: Use the ZenML `fileio` handle to ensure your materialization logic works across artifact stores (local and 

Reviewer 3: Is this meant to be fileio handler?

remote like S3 buckets).

Then edit the pipeline as follows:

```python
pipe(
    step1=step1().with_return_materializers(MyMaterializer),
    step2=step2()
).run()
```

> Please note that for multiple outputs a dictionary can be supplied of type {OUTPUT_NAME: MATERIALIZER_CLASS} to the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please note that for multiple outputs a dictionary can be supplied of type `{OUTPUT_NAME: MATERIALIZER_CLASS}` to the 
```

`with_return_materializers` function.

> Also notice that `with_return_materializers` need only be called on step1, all downstream steps will use the same 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also notice that `with_return_materializers` need only be called on `step1`; all downstream steps will use the same 
```

> Also notice that `with_return_materializers` need only be called on step1, all downstream steps will use the same 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also notice that `with_return_materializers` need only be called on `step1`, all downstream steps will use the same 
```

> `materializer` by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
materializer by default.
```

For more information, visit https://docs.zenml.io/guides/common-usecases/custom-materializer.
```

The above basically means that ZenML does not know how to persist the object of type `MyObj` between steps (how could 
it? We just created this!). Therefore, we can create our own materializer:

```python
import os
from typing import Type

from zenml.artifacts import DataArtifact
from zenml.io import fileio
from zenml.materializers.base_materializer import BaseMaterializer

class MyMaterializer(BaseMaterializer):
    ASSOCIATED_TYPES = [MyObj]
    ASSOCIATED_ARTIFACT_TYPES = [DataArtifact]

    def handle_input(self, data_type: Type[MyObj]) -> MyObj:
        """Read from artifact store"""
        super().handle_input(data_type)
        with fileio.open(os.path.join(self.artifact.uri, 'data.txt'), 'r') as f:
            name = f.read()
        return MyObj(name=name)

    def handle_return(self, my_obj: MyObj) -> None:
        """Write to artifact store"""
        super().handle_return(my_obj)
        with fileio.open(os.path.join(self.artifact.uri, 'data.txt'), 'w') as f:
            f.write(my_obj.name)
```

> Pro-tip: Use the ZenML `fileio` handle to ensure your materialization logic works across artifact stores (local and 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Pro-tip: Use the ZenML `fileio` handler to ensure your materialization logic works across artifact stores (local and 
```
